---
layout: post
title: "The evolutionary purpose of emotions"
---

Your feelings—_all_ your feelings—are true, and acceptable, and most importantly _useful_.

They might not seem that way. In fact, you might find that when strong feelings crop up, they cloud your judgement and drain your energy. They get in the way.

In truth, though, emotions only have this effect on you when you work against them. But how are you supposed to work _with_ them?

The answer lies in embracing them. All of them. First, intellectually, by appreciating how they serve you. Next, physically, by giving them permission to run their course inside your body. Then, _socially_, by acknowledging them to people you can trust.

The intellectual part is easy, and probably something you already do—sometimes. Have you ever summoned anger to finish the last rep of a workout? Congratulations, you're doing it right—that's exactly what anger's for. It's there to help you overcome an obstacle. It temporarily ups your pain tolerance and gives you a burst of energy, perfect for knocking out one more deadlift, rowing that last half mile, or speeding up at the end of an exhausting run.

But you've probably also had experiences where anger did more harm than good—caused you to hurt someone you care about, destroy something important to you, or maybe just embarrass yourself. They key to preventing more of these incidents lies not in avoiding anger, or suppressing it, but befriending it and appreciating its value.

Once you've done that, you can decide in any given moment whether you want to let it take the lead, or not. You've got to feel it, but you don't have to act on it. The same applies for every other emotion—they've all got a purpose, they're all helpful in the right context, and with perspective and practice, you can decide what the right context is. Let's look in more detail at what it looks like to pull that off.

